Preparing a story 
1. Choose a good one. 
Pick a story that is meaningful or very enjoyable to you. You have to like it to tell it well. 
Then, think about whether and why it would be enjoyable to others. Test it out on a 
friend. Even if you like it, if it might not be engaging for others, find a different story.  
2. Because it will be spoken, not read 
Oral storytelling needs to be clear because it goes by listeners’ ears quickly, and they can’t go back to check anything. 
The language should be accessible. The imagery should be vivid. The emotion should be recognizable, broadly relatable, 
and strong. Listeners want to feel something. Give them a reason to spend time listening to you instead of watching 
Netflix. 
3. Stay within the acceptable bounds 
Use good judgement when it comes to the subject matter and language. Don’t include anything hurtful or offensive to 
any group that has good reason to be sensitive, or anything so distasteful to the general audience that they wish they 
were somewhere else. 
3. Learn the story 
Winging it doesn’t work. You need to know the story. There are different ways to go about that. You don’t have to 
memorize the story – in fact, trying to repeat a memorized version word for word can be too risky. This isn’t poetry, 
where you have to get every word right. But you do want to be confident about where you are going.  
First you have to figure out how you learn. Are you a visual, auditory, or kinesthetic learner? Does it help to write and 
read a text and gradually start saying it? Draw pictures of the progress of the story? Listen to a recording of the story? 
Say it while you are walking around the block? All of these? 
Once you decide how you learn, then settle down and do the work. Practice, practice, practice until you’ve really got it. 
4. Get it ready for showtime 
Once you really know the story, start adding the touches that will make it really great.  
Think about how you are using your main instrument, your voice. It needs to be loud enough and interesting enough to 
hold your audience. Vary the tones and the intensity. Vary the pacing and include some pauses and space to give 
listeners time to process.  
What is your body going to be doing while you are telling the story? A story can be effectively told in so many ways – 
standing perfectly still and letting your words, your face, and your voice do the work; Including gestures appropriate to 
what you are saying; moving around the stage to emphasize different elements. 
Think all that through and test it out. Try telling the story in front of a mirror. Make sure that you aren’t doing any odd 
physical ticks, like waving your hands too much for no particular reason or repeatedly pushing up your sleeves. 
5. Try it out on a friend or friends 
You may think it’s perfect, but you may have missed something. A friendly listener can check the logic of the story, point 
out some ways to add a touch of humour, or remove a physical tick. Listen to what they have to say and judge whether 
you should take the advice. If one person finds a hole in the story, probably other people will find that same hole, so it’s 
a good idea to fix it. 
6. Show time 
Trust yourself. You’ve done the work. You know the story, you know it’s a good one, and you know you are good at telling 
it. Relax and share your enjoyment of the story with your listeners!